DOC impact of stratification on the target class in cross-validation splitters (#30576)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/cross_validation.rst

Cross-validation iterators with stratification based on class labels
--------------------------------------------------------------------

> Some classification problems can exhibit very rare classes. of the target

Author: ```suggestion
Some classification tasks can exhibit very rare classes. of the target
```

--------------------------------------------------------------------

Some classification tasks can naturally exhibit rare classes: for instance,
there could be orders of magnitude more negative observations than positive
observations (e.g. medical screening, fraud detection, etc). As a result,
cross-validation splitting can generate train or validation folds without any
occurence of a particular class. This typically leads to undefined
classification metrics (e.g. ROC AUC), exceptions raised when attempting to
call :term:`fit` or missing columns in the output of the `predict_proba` or
`decision_function` methods of multiclass classifiers trained on different
folds.

To mitigate such problems, splitters such as :class:`StratifiedKFold` and
:class:`StratifiedShuffleSplit` implement stratified sampling to ensure that
relative class frequencies are approximately preserved in each fold.

.. note::

  Stratified sampling was introduced in scikit-learn to workaround the
  aforementioned engineering problems rather than solve a statistical one.

  Stratification makes cross-validation folds more homogeneous, and as a result

>   hides some of the variability inherent to fitting models with a limitted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  hides some of the variability inherent to fitting models with a limited
```

  number of observations.

  As a result, stratification can artificially shrink the spread of the metric

>   measured accross cross-validation iterations: the inter-fold variabiliy does

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  measured across cross-validation iterations: the inter-fold variability does
```

--------------------------------------------------------------------

> Some classification problems can exhibit a large imbalance in the distribution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some classification problems can exhibit very rare classes.
```
I'd like to get rid of the term "imbalance". Imbalance is not a problem.

Author: I agree, we could also just rename "classification problems" to "classification tasks".

> of the target classes: for instance there could be orders of magnitude more
> negative observations than positive observations. As a result, cross-validation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of the target classes: for instance, there could be orders of magnitude more
negative observations than positive observations. As a result, cross-validation
```

splitting can generate train or validation folds without any occurence of

> observations of a particular class. This typically leads to undefined

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a particular class. This typically leads to undefined
```

classification metrics (e.g. ROC AUC), exceptions raised when attempting to

> call fit on a single-class training fold or missing columns in the output of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
call :term:`fit` or missing columns in the output of
```

the `predict_proba` or `decision_function` methods of multiclass classifiers
trained on different folds.

To mitigate such problems, splitters such as :class:`StratifiedKFold` and
:class:`StratifiedShuffleSplit` implement stratified sampling to ensure that

> relative class frequencies are approximately preserved in each train and
> validation fold.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
relative class frequencies are approximately preserved in each fold.
```

.. note::

  Stratified sampling was introduced in scikit-learn to workaround the
  afore mentionned engineering problems rather than solve a statistical one.

>   On highly imbalanced classification problems, the inter-fold variability of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  On classification problems with very rare classes, the inter-fold variability of
```

>   the performance metric values measured via stratified cross-validation can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the performance metric measured via stratified cross-validation can
```

  arbitrarily **under-estimate the uncertainty** in the "true" metric value of
  the classifier retrained on all the available data and evaluated on an

>   hypothetical infinite test set.

Reviewer 2: I stop reading after "the classifier", starting with "retrained": sentence too long.

Author: I pushed a commit to split the sentence / rephrase. Please let me know what you think.
